So in this video we're going to start talking about making decisions.
And the first thing we're going to discuss are conditional statements.
So what I'm going to show you right now is not real code.
It's pseudo code if you haven't heard that term.
It's it's like a combination between English and programming.
So this is going to be pseudo code for an IF statement also called conditional statements which are
the way of implementing the different paths the forking paths in our programs based off of comparisons.
So here's what the pseudo code looks like.
The key words have highlighted in purple.
Excellent color choice.
If elif which I hate this about Python more than anything other languages use LCF but Elif it's just
it's just so bizarre.
And then else.
So we'll go through this and a lot more detail.
But let's just focus on this first line.
So we have.
If and then this is the pseudo code the English portion some condition is true.
So that is not going to fly in Python because it's going to think there's a variable named some and
another one called condition and it doesn't know what we're doing and it's going to freak out.
But we would have something appear like if game equals not over or if winner equals one or if high score
is greater than 99 whatever our comparison would go here it needs to evaluate to true in order for this
code represented by do something also not valid Python.
But this code will only run if this bit is true.
And so if this is false Python moves onto the next line.
Else if if so it's like an otherwise.
If so if the first thing wasn't true then try this one.
So some other different condition.
If that's true do this.
Notice the indentation by the way.
We'll spend more time talking about that but Python is very whitespace sensitive.
That's how it knows what pertains to which part of the F or l l f or the else.
So finally there's else and else is like a catch all otherwise.
So if this first one didn't happen this one wasn't true then this is every other condition or every
other possible situation.
Do this.
I want to mention you do not have to have an Aliff or even an else and you can have more than one if
you want.
So what actually goes in this some condition is true.
Part of the pseudo code.
It can vary a lot.
And we're going to spend a couple of videos talking about it.
We're going to see a really simple example next right after this slide.
In this video where we basically compare a single string to check if it equals another string.
So we'll be able to see if color equals purple if City equals Tokyo.
That sort of thing.
But then there's a lot of other comparisons Well we'll get into as we progress through the next couple
of videos.
But again this first simple example looks something like this.
So another little game of thrones example where we have a variable called name and we're checking if
name is equal to Arya Stark by the way this double equal sign.
We're jumping ahead.
We'll talk more about it in a couple of videos from now.
But it's how you check for equality a single equal sign remember is to assign a variable.
So if we had a single equal sign it would try and save Arrius start into the variable name.
Double means compare them.
So if name is equal to Arya Stark.
So this is the do something if true.
So if this is true do this.
If it's not true try this one is name you called John Snow.
If it is print you know nothing.
If it's not OK then otherwise just print.
Carry on.
So we have three possible outcomes in this single program depending on what name is defined as.
So we have name.
If it's John Snow we get you know nothing printed out if name is Arya Stark.
We get Valer Margulis.
It's like it's a little like catch phrase thing you think it means all men must die.
Otherwise which I'm representing by a star just to mean anything else we get carry on.
OK.
So you can take my word for it or let's go over here to a file I've created called called first example
why I included it if you want to just copy the code and it has the exact same thing.
All that's missing of course is a definition for name.
So we could do name equals input like this or we can hard coded.
So I'm just going to type to start name is John Snow and his safe and I do want to point out.
We will talk more about comparisons but when you compare strings.
Everything matters.
So spacing capitalization at all matters so if I had lowercase J uppercase s it's not going to equal
John Snow with capital J.
But that's for another day.
Well actually for today but later video.
So we'll leave it at John Snow.
And I'm going to go run this Python 3 first example that p y.
So we get you know nothing as you can see here.
Put in Jon Snow.
We get you know nothing.
All right let's change that.
Jay has I mentioned to a lowercase J.
Now what do you think will happen.
What will be printed out.
Let's try it and we get carry on because it's not equal to Arya Stark it's not equal to John Snow any
more.
So we get the otherwise carry on as I did want to show that we don't have to have all these other components.
We could just have a simple IF statement a one off thing.
Maybe there's a single thing we're checking for and there isn't an otherwise we just want to check his
name Arya Stark.
That's totally valid.
Nothing prints out.
But if we do change it to Arya Stark
now we get valid regardless.
The other thing I'll show you is that the indentation does matter.
So if I did this what do you think will happen.
Let's try it.
I get an error because Python tells me hang on wait a minute there was an F line before I was expecting
an indented block afterwards I didn't get one.
So it kind of treats this as if it was just a regular print but it's expecting an indented line.
It doesn't have to be a print.
I should i should be very upfront about that.
We could do a lot of different things in here and we will in fact most the time we won't just be printing
things out.
We just have only learned how to print recently so we're doing that.
The other thing I'll point out indentation the standard is for spaces and sublime.
If you just hit tab in a python file I believe by default it's four.
But you could also just do one two three four or you can set your tab size to be four as well down here.
OK.
So I will uncomment all up.
The last thing I realized I didn't touch on is that we need these colons So these colons are really
really important to Python.
It's kind of like an indicator of there's going to be an indented block below and without them we'll
get a syntax error if you try running this now.
Says invalid syntax.
You can't have an if statement without that colon there.
So I just want to wrap it up by just mentioning the syntax matters.
The indentation matters.
But really this video is more about introducing the concept of these conditional statements.
Getting you used to seeing if an elephant.
Else and this idea of having branching paths because for the next couple of videos we're going to be
focusing a lot on what we can put here or here to make different decisions.
But they all at the end of the day evaluate to TRUE or FALSE.
OK.